---
layout: research-post
title: My Projects
menutitle: Research
menuorder: 2
---

## Transport of Coarse Sediment in Mid-Atlantic Streams
Based on well-developed hydraulic geometry relations for width and depth, classic studies initially interpreted the Mid-Atlantic White Clay Creek (WCC) as a quasi-equilibrium, alluvial channel. Subsequent studies document the legacy of colonial-age watershed disturbances and urban development, confounding earlier classifications. To investigate this matter, we contribute new data from reach-scale geomorphic mapping, and observations and modeling of bed material transport. WCC’s longitudinal profile reflects a history of bedrock incision, while hydraulic geometry equations for width and depth indicate quasi-equilibrium cross-sectional adjustment. Alluvial landforms such as pools and riffles, bars, and actively forming floodplains occur at all 12 study sites, but exposures of bedrock and colluvium are also common. The ratio of bankfull to threshold Shields stress averages 1.41 (range 0.41-2.63), suggesting that WCC is an alluvial, threshold, gravel-bed river. However, a numerical model of WCC bed material transport and grain size, calibrated to bedload tracer data, demonstrates that 22% (range 8-73%) of bed material is composed of immobile, locally sourced cobbles and boulders, while the remaining bed material represents mobile, sand to cobble-sized alluvium; this leads us to classify WCC as a semi-alluvial river. Additional computations suggest that channel morphology is insensitive to bed material supply. Field observations imply that bankfull Shields stresses do not represent channel adjustments to achieve stable banks; rather, width adjustment likely reflects cohesive bank processes. Despite the numerous and contradictory labels applied to WCC (i.e., quasi-equilibrium, Anthropocene, bedrock, semi-alluvial, gravel-bed), each term contributes insight that any single conceptual model would be unable to provide alone.

## Particle Breakdown through Chipping and Fragmentation
As rocks are transported, they primarily undergo two breakdown mechanisms: chipping and fragmentation. Chipping occurs at relatively low collision energies typical of bed-load transport, and involves shallow cracking; this process rounds river pebbles in a universal manner. Fragmentation involves catastrophic breakup by fracture growth in the bulk – a response that occurs at high collision energies such as rock falls – and produces angular shards. Despite its geophysical significance, the transition from chipping to fragmentation is not well studied. Indeed, most models implicitly assume that impact erosion of pebbles and bedrock is governed by fragmentation rather than chipping. Here we experimentally delineate the boundary between chipping and fragmentation by examining the mass and shape evolution of concrete particles in a rotating drum. Attrition rate should be a function of both impact energy and material strength; here we keep the former constant, while systematically varying the latter. For sufficiently strong particles, chipping occurred and was characterized by the following: daughter products were significantly smaller than the parent; attrition rate was independent of material strength; and particles experienced monotonic rounding toward a spherical shape. As strength decreased, fragmentation became more significant: mass of daughter products became larger and more varied; attrition rate was inversely proportional to material strength; and shape evolution fluctuated and became non monotonic. Our results validate a previously proposed probabilistic model for impact attrition, and indicate that bedrock erosion models predicated on fragmentation failure need to be revisited. We suggest that the shape of natural pebbles may be utilized to deduce the breakdown mechanism, and infer past transport environments.
